---
title: "ESA 2014 Abstract: Modeling forest disease using a macroparasite
framework"
author: "Noam Ross"
tags: [esa2014, abstract, models, forest-disease]
date: 2014-02-27T13:17:19

--- 


I just submitted the abstract below to the [ESA 2014
meeting](http://www.esa.org/sacramento/). Can't wait! I'm also
organizing an oral session with [Richard
Cobb](https://sites.google.com/a/ucdavis.edu/richard-cobb/): "[Ecosystem
and Community Effects of Native and Invasive
Diseases](http://esa.org/am/organizedorals/#id2743)." Click through for
more details. It's gonna be a good year! I haven't been to ESA since
2008.

> ### Modeling forest disease using a macroparasite framework
>
> Noam Ross, UC Davis Graduate Group in Ecology
>
> **Background/Question/Methods:**
>
> Forest pathogens are typically modeled using variants of *SI* models,
> in which the infection states of trees are binary. However, many
> forest pathogens only infect trees locally, in isolated bole
> infections or leaf infections. Individual trees can have multiple,
> independently reproducing infections. In these cases, models based on
> macroparasite frameworks, where multiple parasites occupy an organism,
> may better represent disease dynamics.
>
> I developed a model for the host足pathogen dynamics of Sudden Oak Death
> (SOD), a disease caused by the invasive pathogen *Phytophthora
> ramorum* in California oak woodlands and forests, based on the
> macroparasite framework of Anderson and May (1978). I compared the
> dynamics of this model to an *SI* model, parameterizing both using
> data from SOD field studies, and examined the conditions under which
> each could reproduce patterns in field data.
>
> **Results/Conclusions**
>
> The macroparasite model reproduces several patterns observed in field
> data which the *SI* model does not. First, the macroparasite model,
> even without age足related variation in parameters, generates data with
> positive age足mortality relationships due to accumulating infections in
> older trees. The *SI* model requires explicit age structure in model
> parameters to produce similar patterns. Secondly, the macroparasite
> model generates observed density足mortality patterns, which can not be
> produced by the *SI* model. Thirdly, the macroparasite model generates
> aggregated distribution of infections in hosts, which can explain the
> phenomenon of "super spreaders", i.e. individuals that produce high
> amounts of inoculum and cause a large fraction of new infections. The
> *SI* model only generates this pattern when extended by including
> individual variation in disease parameters. All these phenomena are
> more pronounced under conditions corresponding to late stages of
> disease invasion, and when the time scales of host and pathogen life
> stage parameters are similar.
>
> The macroparasite framework is a parsimonious approach that can
> explain several important phenomena in forest disease. Data and models
> to with only binary infection status can lead to misinterpretation of
> observed patterns.
>
> Slides and related materials will be archived at <http://doi.org/rpm>
> prior to the conference.[^1]

[^1]: I created a [placeholder record at
    figshare.com](http://doi.org/rpm) so that a permanent link to my
    slides will be in the program. I think this is a great habit to get
    into for conferences. This way your talk will be permanently
    accessible via the conference program both after the actual event.
